04-managing-secrets-with-sops.md, before:

# 04 - Managing Secrets with sops-nix

## Setting the Stage

_A snippet from our conversation that led to this lesson._

> **Anthony:** Yeah, I will just need to scrub a few details (like syncthing device ID's).
>
> **Me:** Aha, then secrets management should be a lesson we squeeze in early!
>
> **Anthony:** yes

---

As you build out your NixOS configuration, you'll inevitably need to handle
sensitive information like API keys, passwords, or device IDs. Committing these
directly into a public Git repository is a major security risk.

In this lesson, we'll set up a robust, secure, and declarative secrets
management system using `sops-nix` and `age`.

### The Two-Repo Strategy

To keep a strong boundary between public configuration and private secrets,
we'll use a two-repository approach:

1.  **`nixos-config` (Your Current Public Repo):** This will continue to hold
    all your system and Home Manager configurations. It will be publicly
    shareable.

2.  **`nixos-secrets` (A New Private Repo):** This repository will contain
    _only_ your encrypted secrets file. It will be kept private.

Your public `nixos-config` will reference the private `nixos-secrets` repo as a
flake input, allowing it to securely access the secrets during a system build.

## Part 1: Getting started - install `age` and `sops`

Before we can create the secrets repo, we need the necessary tools. We'll add
`age`, `sops`, and `ssh-to-age` to your user environment declaratively.

In your public `nixos-config` repository, add the packages to your `home.nix`:

```nix
# In your home.nix
home.packages = [
  pkgs.age
  pkgs.sops
  pkgs.ssh-to-age
  # ... any other packages you have ...
];
```

Now, apply the change from within your `nixos-config` directory:

```bash
home-manager switch --flake .
```

With the tools installed, we can proceed.

## Part 2: Create the private `nixos-secrets` repository

This repository will be the secure vault for your secrets.

### 1. Create and clone the private repository

Go to GitHub and create a new **private** repository named `nixos-secrets`. Then,
clone it to your local machine.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:<your-username>/nixos-secrets.git
cd nixos-secrets
```

### 2. A quick word on `age`

For encrypting secrets, we'll use **`age`**. It's a modern, simple, and secure
encryption tool designed to do one thing well: encrypt files with public keys.
It's a fantastic, user-friendly alternative to GPG for this use case.

### 3. Gather your public keys

A secret encrypted with `sops` can have multiple recipients. For our setup, we
need two:

- **You (the user):** So you can edit the secrets file.
- **Your NixOS machine (the host):** So it can decrypt the secrets during a
  system build.

First, generate a personal `age` key for yourself. This key will live on your
workstation and should be backed up.

```bash
# Create a directory for your personal age key
mkdir -p ~/.config/sops/age

# Generate the key pair
age-keygen -o ~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt

# Display your public key (you'll need this in the next step)
age-keygen -y ~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt
```

Next, get your NixOS host's public key. We'll convert its existing SSH key into
an `age` key. This is preferable to creating a separate `age` key for the host
because it means we don't have to manage or back up a new private key; the
host's identity is self-contained in its SSH key, which NixOS already manages.

```bash
# Get the host's public SSH key and convert it to an age key
ssh-to-age -i /etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key.pub
```

### 4. Create the `.sops.yaml` configuration file

This file tells `sops` which keys are allowed to encrypt files. In your
`nixos-secrets` repo, create a `.sops.yaml` file. We'll use YAML anchors (`&`)
to keep it clean.

```yaml
# .sops.yaml
keys:
  - &user_anthony age1... # Paste your PERSONAL public age key here
  - &host_nixos age1... # Paste the HOST's public age key from ssh-to-age
creation_rules:
  - path_regex: secrets.yaml
    key_groups:
      - age:
          - *user_anthony
          - *host_nixos
```

### 5. Create and encrypt `secrets.yaml`

Now, let's create the file for our secrets. `sops` will automatically use the
rules from `.sops.yaml` to encrypt it for both you and the host.

```bash
sops secrets.yaml
```

Add your first secret to the file when your editor opens:

```yaml
# secrets.yaml
syncthing_device_id: "YOUR-SECRET-SYNCTHING-ID-GOES-HERE"
```

Save and exit. If you `cat secrets.yaml`, you'll see it's now encrypted.

### 6. Commit and push to your private repo

```bash
git add .sops.yaml secrets.yaml
git commit -m "Initial secrets"
git push
```

## Part 3: Integrate `sops-nix` into your public config

Head back to your public `nixos-config` repository.

### 1. Add `sops-nix` and `nixos-secrets` to your `flake.nix`

Update your `flake.nix` to include the new inputs and the `sops-nix` module.

```nix
# flake.nix
{
  description = "My NixOS configuration";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-25.05";
    home-manager = {
      url = "github:nix-community/home-manager/release-25.05";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
    sops-nix = {
      url = "github:Mic92/sops-nix";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
    nixos-secrets = {
      url = "git+ssh://git@github.com/<your-username>/nixos-secrets.git";
      flake = false;
    };
  };

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, home-manager, sops-nix, nixos-secrets }: {
    nixosConfigurations = {
      hostname = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
        system = "x86_64-linux";
        modules = [
          ./configuration.nix
          home-manager.nixosModules.home-manager
          sops-nix.nixosModules.sops # Add the sops-nix module
          # ...
        ];
      };
    };
  };
}
```

### 2. Configure `sops-nix` in `configuration.nix`

Now, we'll configure `sops-nix`. Instead of managing a separate `age` key for the
host, we'll tell `sops-nix` to use the host's existing SSH key.

Add the following to your `configuration.nix`:

```nix
# configuration.nix
{ inputs, pkgs, config, ... }:

{
  # ... your other configuration ...

  # SOPS configuration
  sops.defaultSopsFile = "${inputs.nixos-secrets}/secrets.yaml";
  sops.age.sshKeyPaths = [ "/etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key" ];

  # This makes the secret available to the system
  sops.secrets.syncthing_device_id = {};
}
```

This is much cleaner, as the host's identity is self-contained.

## Part 4: The workflow

Your secrets management workflow is now:

1.  **To edit secrets:**

    - `cd` into your private `nixos-secrets` repository.
    - Run `sops secrets.yaml`. Your personal `age` key lets you edit.
    - `git commit` and `git push` your changes.

2.  **To apply secrets:**
    - `cd` into your public `nixos-config` repository.
    - Run `nix flake update --update-input nixos-secrets` to pull the latest
      secrets.
    - Run `sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .` to apply the changes.

You now have a secure, and declarative way to manage your secrets!

Commit message:

docs(lesson): Improve secrets lesson based on user feedback

04-managing-secrets-with-sops.md, after:

# 04 - Managing Secrets with sops-nix

## Setting the Stage

_A snippet from our conversation that led to this lesson._

> **Anthony:** Yeah, I will just need to scrub a few details (like syncthing device ID's).
>
> **Me:** Aha, then secrets management should be a lesson we squeeze in early!
>
> **Anthony:** yes

---

As you build out your NixOS configuration, you'll inevitably need to handle
sensitive information like API keys, passwords, or device IDs. Committing these
directly into a public Git repository is a major security risk.

In this lesson, we'll set up a robust, secure, and declarative secrets
management system using `sops-nix` and `age`.

### The Two-Repo Strategy

To keep a strong boundary between public configuration and private secrets,
we'll use a two-repository approach:

1.  **`nixos-config` (Your Current Public Repo):** This will continue to hold
    all your system and Home Manager configurations. It will be publicly
    shareable.

2.  **`nixos-secrets` (A New Private Repo):** This repository will contain
    _only_ your encrypted secrets file. It will be kept private.

Your public `nixos-config` will reference the private `nixos-secrets` repo as a
flake input, allowing it to securely access the secrets during a system build.

## Part 1: Getting started - install `age` and `sops`

Before we can create the secrets repo, we need the necessary tools. We'll add
`age`, `sops`, and `ssh-to-age` to your user environment declaratively.

In your public `nixos-config` repository, add the packages to your `home.nix`:

```nix
# In your home.nix
home.packages = [
  pkgs.age
  pkgs.sops
  pkgs.ssh-to-age
  # ... any other packages you have ...
];
```

Now, apply the change from within your `nixos-config` directory:

```bash
home-manager switch --flake .
```

With the tools installed, we can proceed.

## Part 2: Create the private `nixos-secrets` repository

This repository will be the secure vault for your secrets.

### 1. Create and clone the private repository

Go to GitHub and create a new **private** repository named `nixos-secrets`. Then,
clone it to your local machine.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:<your-username>/nixos-secrets.git
cd nixos-secrets
```

### 2. A quick word on `age`

For encrypting secrets, we'll use **`age`**. It's a modern, simple, and secure
encryption tool designed to do one thing well: encrypt files with public keys.
It's a fantastic, user-friendly alternative to GPG for this use case.

### 3. Gather your public keys

A secret encrypted with `sops` can have multiple recipients. For our setup, we
need two:

- **You (the user):** So you can edit the secrets file.
- **Your NixOS machine (the host):** So it can decrypt the secrets during a
  system build.

First, generate a personal `age` key for yourself. This key will live on your
workstation and should be backed up.

```bash
# Create a directory for your personal age key
mkdir -p ~/.config/sops/age

# Generate the key pair
age-keygen -o ~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt

# Display your public key (you'll need this in the next step)
age-keygen -y ~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt
```

Next, get your NixOS host's public key. We'll convert its existing SSH key into
an `age` key. This is preferable to creating a separate `age` key for the host
because it means we don't have to manage or back up a new private key; the
host's identity is self-contained in its SSH key, which NixOS already manages.

> **Note:** For the host's SSH key to exist, you must have the OpenSSH service
> enabled in your `configuration.nix`. If you haven't already, add this line:
> `services.openssh.enable = true;`

```bash
# Get the host's public SSH key and convert it to an age key
ssh-to-age -i /etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key.pub
```

### 4. Create the `.sops.yaml` configuration file

This file tells `sops` which keys are allowed to encrypt files. In your
`nixos-secrets` repo, create a `.sops.yaml` file. We'll use YAML anchors (`&`)
to keep it clean.

```yaml
# .sops.yaml
keys:
  - &user_anthony age1... # Paste your PERSONAL public age key here
  - &host_nixos age1... # Paste the HOST's public age key from ssh-to-age
creation_rules:
  - path_regex: secrets.yaml
    key_groups:
      - age:
          - *user_anthony
          - *host_nixos
```

### 5. Create and encrypt `secrets.yaml`

Now, let's create the file for our secrets. `sops` will automatically use the
rules from `.sops.yaml` to encrypt it for both you and the host.

```bash
sops secrets.yaml
```

Add your first secret to the file when your editor opens:

```yaml
# secrets.yaml
syncthing_device_id: "YOUR-SECRET-SYNCTHING-ID-GOES-HERE"
```

Save and exit. If you `cat secrets.yaml`, you'll see it's now encrypted.

### 6. Commit and push to your private repo

```bash
git add .sops.yaml secrets.yaml
git commit -m "Initial secrets"
git push
```

## Part 3: Integrate `sops-nix` into your public config

Head back to your public `nixos-config` repository.

### 1. Add `sops-nix` and `nixos-secrets` to your `flake.nix`

Update your `flake.nix` to include the new inputs and the `sops-nix` module.

```nix
# flake.nix
{
  description = "My NixOS configuration";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-25.05";
    home-manager = {
      url = "github:nix-community/home-manager/release-25.05";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
    sops-nix = {
      url = "github:Mic92/sops-nix";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
    nixos-secrets = {
      url = "git+ssh://git@github.com/<your-username>/nixos-secrets.git";
      flake = false;
    };
  };

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, home-manager, sops-nix, nixos-secrets }: {
    nixosConfigurations = {
      hostname = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
        system = "x86_64-linux";
        modules = [
          ./configuration.nix
          home-manager.nixosModules.home-manager
          sops-nix.nixosModules.sops # Add the sops-nix module
          # ...
        ];
      };
    };
  };
}
```

### 2. Configure `sops-nix` in `configuration.nix`

Now, we'll configure `sops-nix`. Instead of managing a separate `age` key for the
host, we'll tell `sops-nix` to use the host's existing SSH key.

Add the following to your `configuration.nix`:

```nix
# configuration.nix
{ inputs, pkgs, config, ... }:

{
  # ... your other configuration ...

  # SOPS configuration
  sops.defaultSopsFile = "${inputs.nixos-secrets}/secrets.yaml";
  sops.age.sshKeyPaths = [ "/etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key" ];

  # This makes the secret available to the system
  sops.secrets.syncthing_device_id = {};
}
```

This is much cleaner, as the host's identity is self-contained.

## Part 4: Using your secrets

With the configuration in place, you can now reference your secrets anywhere in
your NixOS modules. The values are made available under `config.sops.secrets`.

For example, to use the Syncthing ID you created, you would reference it in your
configuration like this:

```nix
# in configuration.nix or any other module
services.syncthing.settings.devices.my-phone.id = config.sops.secrets.syncthing_device_id;
```

## Part 5: The workflow

Your secrets management workflow is now:

1.  **To edit secrets:**

    - `cd` into your private `nixos-secrets` repository.
    - Run `sops secrets.yaml`. Your personal `age` key lets you edit.
    - `git commit` and `git push` your changes.

2.  **To apply secrets:**
    - `cd` into your public `nixos-config` repository.
    - Run `nix flake update --update-input nixos-secrets` to pull the latest
      secrets.
    - Run `sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .` to apply the changes.

You now have a secure, and declarative way to manage your secrets!
