# Anthony's NixOS Adventure

This repository contains a series of lessons to help my friend Anthony get his
new NixOS system up and running.

## Current Setup

Anthony installed NixOS using the graphical installer and is currently running
the GNOME desktop environment. The initial NixOS configuration was generated by
the installer.

## Lessons

These lessons are driven by Anthony's questions as he explores NixOS.

- [01 - Flake Quickstart](./01-flake-quickstart.md)
- [02 - Home Manager](./02-home-manager.md)
- [03 - Declarative Terminal with Kitty](./03-declarative-terminal-kitty.md)
- [04 - Managing Secrets with sops-nix](./04-managing-secrets-with-sops.md)
- [05 - Testing, Rollbacks, and Other NixOS Superpowers](./05-testing-and-rollbacks.md)

More to come!

### First questions

Anthony:

> I got a bunch of stuff installed on the laptop without much trouble. The only
> real fail I had was getting a font I want installed but not set as my terminal
> font. I can see it as an option in the TextEdit app. My question at this
> point, the docs (neither https://nixos.org/learn/ nor the NixOS Manual linked
> there) did not lead me to Home Manager. So now maybe some of the stuff I
> installed in the system should have been in Home Manager, but it is slightly
> vague as to which things. And I'm wondering why the Learn section of the site
> does not include Home Manager.

Me:

> I think NixOS learn is careful not to throw too many new concepts at the user
> and many users get quite far without home manager. Do you have a sense of how
> to get started with home manager or can I give you a basic starting point.
> Where are you at currently? Do you have a flake yet or are you adding packages
> to /etc/nixos/configuration.nix?

Anthony:

I got all my critical apps installed and some of them needed config, like
Syncthing, and I got that all working. So far I'm only adding to
configuration.nix. I was thinking I would at least move the stuff I added to
another file and get that into git, but I wanted to figure out what needed to be
split into Home Manager. I do not have a sense of how to get started with it
since I did not find official docs. I did not want to just start Googling for
random stuff yet.
